Dept. of CSE, IIT Dhanbad
Operating Systems Practice
20/01/2026
Lab Assignment – 3

1. A parent process creates two child processes C1 and C2.
Process C2 further creates four child processes C3, C4, C7, and C8.
Process C3 creates C5, and process C4 creates C6.
The execution order must satisfy the following constraints:
1. C5 and C6 execute first, in any order.
2. After both C5 and C6 complete, processes C3, C4, C7, and C8 execute in any or-
der.
3. Only after C3, C4, C7, and C8 have completed, processes C1 and C2 execute in
any order.
4. The parent process executes last.
Write a C program using fork() and wait() to enforce the above execution order.
For every process created, display its process ID and parent process ID.

2. Write a C program that simulates the FCFS CPU scheduling algorithm using a linked
list to represent the ready queue.
The program should satisfy the following requirements:
1. Each process should be represented as a node in a linked list containing:
o Process ID (PID)
o CPU burst time
2. Processes must be inserted into the ready queue in the order of arrival.
3. The scheduler should execute processes strictly in FCFS order.
4. Once a process is executed, its corresponding node must be deleted from the
linked list (queue).
5. The program should continue execution until the ready queue becomes empty.
6. For each process, display:
o Process ID
o Burst Time
o Waiting Time
o Turnaround Time
7. Calculate and display:
o Average Waiting Time
o Average Turnaround Time

Input
 Number of processes
 Id of the process(Integer)
 arrival time can be same or different
 Burst time for each process
Output
 Execution order of processes
 Waiting time and turnaround time for each process
 Average waiting time and average turnaround time

Instructions
1. Create a folder with your admission number.
2. Inside it, create another folder named Assignment2.
3. Write all programs only inside this folder.
4. To write a program, open the editor using the command:
gedit Prog1.c &
 To compile the program, use the command:
gcc Prog1.c -o Prog1
 To execute the program, use the command:
./Prog1
System calls
1. #include <unistd.h>
int fork(void);
2. #include <sys/wait.h>
int wait(int *status);
3. #include <unistd.h>
int getpid(void);
int getppid(void);
4,#include <unistd.h>
int execlp(const char *file, const char *arg, ...);
example: execlp(ls, “”, NULL)